---
title: "Point Four of Elon's Fork is the Scary One"
excerpt: "The concept of a 'fork' comes from Open Source software, and it means a schism."
---

Have you read Elon's "[Fork in the Road](https://www.opm.gov/fork)" email? This
is the one where he starts doing to the United States government what he did to
Twitter.

Honestly, I'm kind of in the camp that Twitter as a software product is as good
or better now than it was before, with an order of magnitude less staff.
Certainly the [chicken-little about its impending catastrophic
failure](https://www.zdnet.com/article/why-twitter-will-fail-shortly/) was
wrong. Elon _does_ seem (to this casual observer) to have made it much more
efficient, and I have no reason to doubt he can do the same with the federal
government. Maybe that's not so bad.

However, only three of the four points in Fork in the Road—"Return to Office,"
"Performance culture," and "More streamlined and flexible workforce"—are about
efficiency. The fourth point, entitled "Enhanced standards of conduct," is the
one that seems to indicate the most dramatic, far-reaching change (emphasis
mine):

> **The federal workforce should be comprised of employees who are reliable,
loyal, trustworthy**, and who strive for excellence in their daily work.
Employees will be subject to enhanced standards of suitability and conduct as
we move forward. Employees who engage in unlawful behavior **or other
misconduct** will be prioritized for appropriate investigation and discipline,
including termination.

If the referent of loyalty were the Constitution, that would be one thing. To
this casual observer, the referent is Trump. If future historians come to see
Trump as one who shifted America away from the [rule of
law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_law), point four of "Fork in the
Road" may be a key text.

Elon's choice of the word "fork" is quite interesting. [A fork in the context
of an Open Source software
project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fork_(software_development)) is a split
in the software project community (emphasis mine):

> In software engineering, a project fork happens when developers take a copy
of source code from one software package and start independent development on
it, creating a distinct and separate piece of software. The term often implies
not merely a development branch, but also a split in the developer community;
as such, it is **a form of schism**.

I don't expect Trump to have known this meaning of the word. Perhaps Elon
explained it to him.

Empires don't last forever. [Neither do
republics](/2025/the-birth-of-the-american-empire/).
